---
title: 1-2 Introduction to Ledger Art
permalink: /docs/1-2/
---
## Subject
IEFA, Social Studies, Visual Arts

## Grade Level
4/5

## Duration
50 minutes

## Established Goal(s)/Target(s)
-	Students will be able to identify what ledger art is.
-	Students will be able to define symbolism and describe the symbolism in contemporary ledger art.

## Content Standards
### IEFA EUs
- <u>IEFA Essential Understanding #6</u> History is a story most often related through the subjective experience of the teller. With the inclusion of more and varied voices, histories are being rediscovered and revised. History told from an Indian perspective frequently conflicts with the stories mainstream historians tell.
### Other Content Standards
- <u>SS.H.4.2</u> identify events and policies that have impacted and been influenced by tribes in Montana.
- <u>SL.4.1</u> engage effectively in a range of collaborative discussions (one-on-one, in groups, and teacher-led) with diverse partners on grade 4 topics and texts, building on others' ideas and expressing their own clearly.
- <u>SL.5.1</u> engage effectively in a range of collaborative discussions (one-on-one, in groups, and teacher-led) with diverse partners on grade 5 topics and texts, building on others' ideas and expressing their own clearly.
- <u>Anchor Standard #7</u> Perceive and analyze artistic work. Compare components of visual imagery.
- <u>Anchor Standard #11</u> Relate artistic ideas and works with societal, cultural, and historical context to deepen understanding, including traditional and contemporary artistic ideas and works by American Indians. Interpret artworks through observation and information about context.

## Prep
Teachers should complete the following preparation for the lesson:

- Prepare the [Ledger Art](https://youtu.be/GVZ8AHBHiC0) video for student viewing. ([Transcript](../1-2-t1/))
- Prepare the [John Isaiah Pepion: Native American Ledger Artist](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VX0hpiLP-FY) video for student viewing. ([Transcript](../1-2-t2/))
- Prepare the [Indigenous Beauty: Terrance Guardipee](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-8cVxlT1SHI) video (0:00 – 2:46) for student viewing. ([Transcript](../1-2-t3/))
- Create student pairs.
- Make copies of [Symbols in Contemporary Ledger Art](../resources/1-2_symbolism-in-contemporary-ledger-art.pdf).

## Vocabulary
The following are terms used in this lesson.

Term | Definition
-- | --
**Native American/American Indian/Indigenous** | terms to refer to groups of people who claim the earliest connection to land in the United States. These people lived in the United States before the United States existed and have maintained distinct cultures and ways of life. Native American tribes have status as independent (sovereign) nations within the United States.
**Ledger**  |  a book of financial accounts.
**Symbolism**  |  the use of symbols to represent ideas or qualities.

## Lesson Guide

### Warm Up (5 minutes)
Think-Pair-Share
```
What are reservations, and how did they come to exist?
Did Native Americans live on reservations before Europeans came to this land?
```

### Ledger Art (30 mins)
Using the information provided below, in your own words, explain the concept of ledger art to the class.
```
"The majority of what we most commonly perceive of as classic “ledger art”  
was produced during the second half of the nineteenth century, a time of  
great upheaval for Plains peoples. The tradition of portraying narrative  
scenes of heroic deeds continued to evolve as Indian artists transitioned  
from traditional Plains life to reservation living and embraced the use of  
paper, pens, pencils, inks, and watercolors. To create their drawings, these  
artists used whatever kind of paper was available to them: lined paper,  
foolscap, newsprint, books, or even old letters. However, the most readily  
obtainable paper throughout the 1800s was ledger paper—lined paper from  
account books. Eventually, the term “ledger art” was applied to the broader  
style of painting, whether or not the artist actually used ledger paper."  
(The Art of Storytelling: Plains Indian Perspectives).
```
Play [Ledger Art \| Smithsonian education](https://youtu.be/GVZ8AHBHiC0) (0:00 – 4:34) video for students.

Discussion
```
How does ledger art tell a story?  
Who is ledger art made for? And why is it made?
```

Tell students that although ledger art originated in the 1800’s, and used whatever materials were available on the reservations, individuals in Tribes continue to create ledger art to this day as an exploration of their culture, their community, and their identities in modern America.

```
"Contemporary Ledger Art Drawings are created by Native American artists  
from the late 1980s until today. These drawings are done on any surface  
that was previously used for a different purpose. The repurposed surface,  
medium, and subject reflect the life of today’s Native American, just as  
the Traditional Ledger art did the life of that era’s Native American  
artists." (J.W. Wiggins, 2020).
```
Play [John Isaiah Pepion: Native American Ledger Artist](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VX0hpiLP-FY) video for students.

Display several pieces of ledger art.
[Examples of ledger art from John Isaiah Pepion](https://johnisaiahpepion.com/collections/prints) (Blackfeet Nation in northern Montana). Click Shop --> Original Artwork.

Lead a discussion with the students about what they think is depicted in the ledger art.

Think-Pair-Share
```
What helps you know that this ledger art was created now and not in the past?  
Why do you think artists still choose to tell stories using the ledger art style?
```

### Symbolism in Contemporary Ledger Art (15 minutes)
Pair students and pass out [Symbols in Contemporary Ledger Art](../resources/1-2-symbolism-in-contemporary-ledger-art.pdf) to each student.

Tell students that they will watch a video about a particular piece of ledger art and will describe the symbolism represented by the artist. Explain that symbolism is a way to use images to convey ideas and qualities. The symbolism in this piece tells the artist’s story.

Play [Indigenous Beauty: Terrance Guardipee](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-8cVxlT1SHI) video (0:00 – 2:46). As students watch the video, they should write what each symbol represents on the *Symbols in Contemporary Art* handout.

Key

| Symbol	| What it represents |
| ----- | ------------------ |
| **Mountains** |	Glacier park area where the artist lives |
| **Gold circle**	| Sun god |
| **Train**	| The changing of time; new eras |
| **Blackfeet on train** | Blackfeet in charge of their own destiny |
| **Ledger**	| Blackfeet members of the Tribe; personal connections |
| **Shipping statements** |	Migration of the Tribe; follow the buffalo |
| **Map**	| Ownership of land; protecting homeland |
| **Rolling hills**	| Stars are special to the Blackfeet; morning star gave the Blackfeet Sun Dance healing ceremonies |

After the video, if students need to re-watch because they missed something, replay the video.

Pairs of students share to the class what each symbol represents.

### Homework
Students fill out the question at the bottom of the handout:
```
How do all these symbols work together to tell Terrence Guardipee’s story?
```
