---
title: 1 Circuits
permalink: /docs/1/
---
## Overview

| ---: | :--- |
| **Grade Level** | 6-8 |
| **Duration**  | 150 minutes  |
|   |   |

## Established Goal(s)/Target(s)
- Understand and create simple, parallel, and computational circuits.
- Understand and code sequences using functions.

## Computer Science Standards
- *CS.AP.6-8.1* use algorithms to address complex problems.
- *CS.AP.6-8.2* create clearly named variables that represent different data types and perform operations on their values.
- *CS.AP.6-8.10* document programs in order to make them easier to follow, test, and debug.

## Materials
The following materials are required for this lesson:
- 1 Computer with Arduino IDE downloaded
- 1 Circuit Playground Classic
- Copper tape
- 3 LEDs
- 3 Alligator clips
- 1 USB to microUSB
- Card stock

## Vocabulary
The following are terms used in this lesson.

 Term | Definition
 ---: | --
**Circuit**  |  composed of individual electronic components, such as LEDs, connected by conductive material (copper tape or conductive thread) which electric current can flow through.
**Current**  |  a flow of positive electric charge.
**Conductor**  |  materials that allow the flow of electric current.
**Insulator**  |  materials that block the flow of electric current.
**LED**  |  a device that emits light when an electric current passes through it.
**Microcontroller**  |  a small computer on a single chip that stores a single program. The Circuit Playground Express is an example of a microcontroller.
**Variable**  |  used to store information to be referenced and manipulated in a computer program.
**Function**  |  a “chunk” of code that you can use over and over again by name.

## Activity Guide

### Simple Circuits
Variables
digitalWrite
Circuit diagram

### Parallel Circuits
Circuit diagram
Sequences
Commenting

### Computational Circuits
Circuit diagram
Functions
