---
title: Overview
permalink: /docs/2-0/
---
## Overview

| ---: | :--- |
| **Grade Level** | 6-8 |
| **Duration**  | 150 minutes  |
|   |   |

## Established Goal(s)/Target(s)
- Design and construct a computational artifact.
- Use a sensor to collect data from diverse users and develop models.

## Computer Science Standards
- *CS.AP.6-8.6* seek and incorporate feedback from team members and users to refine a solution that meets user needs.
- *CS.AP.6-8.8* systematically test and refine programs using a range of test cases.
- *CS.CS.6-8.2* design projects that combine hardware and software components to collect and exchange data.
- *CS.CS.6-8.3* systematically identify and fix problems with computing devices and their components.
- *CS.IC.6-8.3* collaborate with other contributors when creating a computational artifact.

## Materials
The following materials are required for this lesson:
- 1 Computer with Arduino IDE downloaded
- 1 Circuit Playground Classic
- Copper tape
- 6 LEDs <span class="todo">Need to decide how many LEDs per project</span>
- 3 Alligator clips <span class="todo">Need to decide how many alligator clips</span>
- Aluminum foil
- Tracing paper
- Glue
- Markers/Colored pencils
- 1 USB to microUSB
- Card stock

## Vocabulary
The following are terms used in this activity.

 Term | Definition
 ---: | --
**Analog**  |  relating to or using signals or information represented by a range of values.
**Digital**  |  relating to or using signals or information represented by binary values.
**Sensor**  |  a device which detects or measures a physical property and records, indicates, or otherwise responds to it.
**Data**  |  items of information, often numeric.
**Dummy Variable**  |  a placeholder variable.
**Debug**  |  identify and remove errors from computer hardware or software.
