---
title: Conditionals
permalink: /docs/3-1/
---
## Overview
In this section, we will use our new understanding of the touch sensors to create three distinct conditions:
- If the sensor value is high, the friendship level is low,
- If the sensor value is moderate, the friendship level is medium,
- If the sensor value is low, the friendship level is high.

We will then use the NeoPixels to create a visual representation of each of these conditions.

This section builds on understanding gained from [Circuits](../1-0/) and [Design the Friend-O-Meter](../2-0/).

## Conditionals
Based on the value of the sensor, we want our code to decide between three different options:
1. If the sensor value is **high**, do **A**.
2. If the sensor value is **medium**, do **B**.
3. If the sensor value is **low**, do **C**.

To create this type of decision-making in code, we use **conditionals**. A conditional statement begins with the word *if*, just like our three conditions above. After the if, there is a condition. The condition either has a value of **true** or **false**. A statement that is either true or false is called a **Boolean statement**. When we write a conditional in code, it looks like this:

```
if( <Boolean statement> ) {
  //run some code
}
```

If the *Boolean statement* is true, the code will run. Otherwise, everthing inside the brackets will be skipped and the code will continue. We will need to decide what it means for the sensor value to be "high", "medium", and "low". But for example, if we decide that the sensor value is high if it is above 900, then we would write:

```
if(sensorVal > 900) {
  //do A
}
```

In order to further understand how to write conditionals, we need to learn more about Boolean statements and compound Boolean statements.

### Booleans
A **Boolean statement** is a statement that is either **true** or **false**. We use Boolean statements often in mathematics. For example, *X=8* will be true if *X* is *8* and will be false if *X* is anything else. *X > 10* will be true if *X* is *20* and false if *X* is *4*.

We will need some comparison operations before moving forward. Here is a list of comparison operations with examples:

Operator | What We Say | Example | Description
-------: | :---------- | :------ | :----------
== | EQUAL TO | sensorVal == 900 | Returns true if sensorVal is equal to 900 and false otherwise.
!=  | NOT EQUAL TO  | sensorVal != 900  | Returns true if sensorVal is not equal to 900 and false otherwise.
\>  | GREATER THAN  | sensorVal > 900  | Returns true if sensorVal is greater than 900 and false otherwise.
\>=  | GREATER THAN OR EQUAL TO  | sensorVal >= 900  |  Returns true if sensorVal is greater than or equal to 900 and false otherwise.
\<  | LESS THAN  | sensorVal < 900  | Returns true if sensorVal is less than 900 and false otherwise.
\<=  | LESS THAN OR EQUAL TO  | sensorVal <= 900  |  Returns true if sensorVal is greater than 900 and false otherwise.

### Boolean Operators
Just like we perform operations on numbers in math (addition, subtraction, multiplication, division), we can perform operations on Booleans.

Symbol | What We Say | Example | Description
-----: | :---------- | :------ | :----------
!  | NOT  | !(sensorVal == 900) | Logically equivalent to sensorVal != 900. The NOT operator turns true to false and false to true.
&&  | AND   | sensorVal < 900 && sensorVal > 700  | Returns true if sensorVal is between 700 and 900 and false otherwise.
\|\|  | OR  | sensorVal > 900 \|\| sensorVal < 700  |  Returns true if sensorVal is greater than 900 or less than 700 and false otherwise.

Here is a list of the values that come from Boolean operators as a reference. Here, we are using variables P and Q to denote Boolean statements.

P | Q | !P | P && Q | P \|\| Q
--- | --- | --- | --- | ---
**T** | **T** | F | T | T
**T**  | **F**  | F  | F  | T
**F**  | **T**  | T  | F  | T
**F**  | **F**  | T  | F  | F

### Else
Consider the following conditions for evaluating a student's grade on an exam:

```
The student scores a 73.
Store 73 in a variable called grade.

1 If grade >= 90,
2   The student gets an A.
3 Otherwise, if grade >= 80,
4   The student gets a B.
5 Otherwise, if grade >= 70,
6   The student gets a C.
7 Otherwise, if grade >= 60,
8   The student gets a D.
9 Otherwise,
10  The student gets an F.
```

In the above example, each condition is dependent on the conditions before it being false. Here, the student received a 73. The code begins at line 1: *73 >= 90* is false so line 2 is skipped and we go to line 3. *73 >= 80* is false so line 4 is skipped, and we move to line 5. *73 >= 70* is true. So we run the code at line 6, and we skip past all other statements and resume on what would be line 11.

In code, this would look like this:

```
int grade = 73;

if(grade >= 90) {
  //A
}
else if(grade >= 80) {
  //B
}
else if(grade >= 70) {
  //C
}
else if(grade >= 60) {
  //D
}
else {
  //F
}
```

We always end a series of *else if* statements with a catchall *else* for if the condition was note met by another of the preceding statements.

We should also note that the same code could be written with just *if* statements rather than a series of *else if*:

```
int grade = 73;

if(grade >= 90) {
  //A
}
if(grade >= 80 && grade < 90) {
  //B
}
if(grade >= 70 && grade < 80) {
  //C
}
if(grade >= 60 && grade < 70) {
  //D
}
if(grade < 60) {
  //F
}
```

Choosing whether to use *else if* statements or compound Booleans in a series if *if* statements is a matter of personal preference. They will both do the same thing. The key thing is choosing code that will be more readable for others and for yourself.

## Three Levels of Friendship
We now need to partition our sensor values into three *discrete* (separate/distinct/no overlap) categories: high, medium, low.

### Three Conditions
The *analogRead* function will return a value from *0* to *1023*. Based on the data you collected in [Working With Sensors](../2-3/), we now have to decide what values of sensorVal will be considered high, medium, and low. There should be no overlap betwen the categories, and all possible values should be accounted for in our categories.

As an example, we may decide the following:
```
HIGH:   900 - 1023
MEDIUM: 700 - 899
LOW:    0   - 699
```

Notice that in this example, there is not a value that would be true for more than one category, and all values from 0 - 1023 are accounted for.

You can use the following table to help guide your thinking about what values will constitute each category:

Category | Low Value | High Value
-------: | :-------: | :--------:
HIGH | |
MEDIUM  |   |  
LOW  |   |  

### A Function for Each Condition
**Task** Use the following starter code:

```
//Part 1
int touchSensor = A10;  //name your aluminum foil patch
                        //change the value to the pin you used

//Part 2
void setup() {
  Serial.begin(9600); //allows you to print to the Serial Monitor
  pinMode(touchSensor, INPUT); //sets the aluminum foil patch to input
  digitalWrite(touchSensor, HIGH); //sends current to the aluminum foil patch
}

//Part 3
void loop() {
  int touchVal = analogRead(touchSensor); //reads the current value of the aluminum foil and
                                          //stores the value in a new variable
  delay(100); //waits 1/10 of a second
  Serial.println(touchVal); //prints the sensor value to the Serial Monitor

  //add your conditions here
}

//Part 4
void high() {
  Serial.println("This is the HIGH function!")
}

void medium() {
  Serial.println("This is the MEDIUM function!")
}

void low() {
  Serial.println("This is the LOW function!")
}
```

1. Look at the three functions that were created below the loop. These will be a way to print out to the console whether our functions are working properly.
2. In the *loop* function, where indicated, add conditionals for the three sensor categories.
3. Inside each condition, call the function that aligns with that condition.

**Solution** (Hover below to see our solution)

<span class="solution">
if(sensorVal >= 900) {
  high();
}
else if(sensorVal >= 700) {
  medium();
}
else {
  low();
}
</span>
