---
title: 3-2 Design the Ledger Art Project
permalink: /docs/3-2/
---
## Overview

| ---: | :--- |
| **Subject** | IEFA, Visual Arts |
| **Grade Level** | 4-6 |
| **Duration**  | 50 minutes  |
|   |   |

## Established Goal(s)/Target(s)
-	Students will be able to understand the make design choices for computational circuits.
-	Students will be able to understand and construct a visual narrative in the style of ledger art.

## Content Standards
- **IEFA Essential Understandings**
  - *EU 6 (History from Indian Perspectives)* History is a story most often related through the subjective experience of the teller. With the inclusion of more and varied voices, histories are being rediscovered and revised. History told from an Indian perspective frequently conflicts with the stories mainstream historians tell.
- **Other Content Standards**
  - *Anchor Standard #1* Generate and conceptualize artistic ideas and work. Collaborate on multiple approaches to a creative art or design problem and develop a plan from concept to completion for an artwork.
  - *Anchor Standard #4* Select, analyze, and interpret artistic work for presentation. Describe how past, present, and emerging technologies impact the preservation and presentation of artwork.
  - *Anchor Standard #8* Construct meaningful interpretations of artistic works. Analyze subject matter, form, and use of media in artwork.
  - *Anchor Standard #10* Synthesize and relate knowledge and personal experiences to make art. Create artworks that reflect community cultural traditions.

## Prep
Teachers should complete the following preparation for the lesson:

- Students’ Ledger Projects so far
- Tracing paper
- Blue, red, regular pencils
- Prepare copies of [Storyboarding the Ledger Project](../resources/3-2_storyboard-ledger.pdf) handout (1/student)


## Vocabulary
The following are terms used in this lesson.

Term | Definition
---: | --
**Computational Circuit** | circuits that can control the flow of current by processing sequential steps made by humans.

## Lesson Guide

### Intro (10 mins)
Teacher explains that students will now think about the circuit they want to put on their Ledger Project.

Teacher shows examples of circuits from other Ledger Projects to give some ideas. <span class="todo">Create/gather examples of ledger art projects</span> The [Ledger Art Project Guide](../ledgerguide/)
provides a step-by-step process of constructing and coding the Ledger Art Project
with supplementary images.

Ask students why each LED is attached to a different pin
```
Why do you think the designer made this choice?
```
Tell students that in their designs, they can choose to attach each LED to a different pin or they can connect multiple LEDs to a single pin to make their LEDs in parallel. This is all part of the design process.

### Plan the Circuit Diagram (15 mins)
Teacher passes out [Storyboarding the Ledger Project](../resources/3_2-storyboard-ledger.pdf)
handout.

Students work independently.

Teacher supports students with individual questions and makes comments to the full class when class misconceptions emerge.

### Design and Craft the Circuit (25 mins)
Teacher describes each step of the crafting process and writes each on the board:
- Draw circuit diagram on tracing paper.
- Get circuit checked by teacher.
- Draw approved circuit diagram on Ledger Project.
- Add copper tape and LEDs to circuit drawing.

Students craft their projects.
