---
title: Arrays
permalink: /docs/4-3/
---
## Overview
In order to play a note on the Circuit Playground, we need to invoke the *CircuitPlayground.playTone(<frequency>, <duration>)* function. This function requires the *frequency* and *duration* of each note that we want to play. We could call this function as many times as necessary for all of our notes or we could find a better way to organize the frequencies and durations so that
1. We do not have to write as much code, and
2. We can have more readable code.

To do this, we are going to use arrays to store our frequencies and durations. This section will explore arrays and then show how we can use arrays to complete our project.

## Arrays
Arrays are data structures that can hold multiple variables of the same type in a list-like structure. For example, here is the declaration and initialization of an array that might store a students' grades in a class:

```
int grades[] = {92, 85, 89, 93, 94};
```

This array has size 5 because there are 5 numbers in the array. To get the number of elements in the array, we can write the code:

```
sizeof(numbers);
```

*numbers* is the reference for the space in the memory that stores the array.

### Accessing Elements of an Array
If we want to get the numbers in the array, we need to know where the numbers are located in the array. We use **indices** to determine the positions of elements in an array. Indices begin at *0* and end at *sizeof(<array name>) - 1*. In *numbers*, there are 5 elements, but the indices start at *0* and end at *4*.

If we call

```
numbers[0];
```

we would get the number 92 since that is the 0th element. Likewise, calling

```
numbers[4]
```

would yield 94 since that is the element at index 4.

### Iterating Through an Array
If we wanted to print all numbers in the array to the Serial Monitor, we could do so by iterating through each index of the array in a *for loop*. The code would look like this:

```
for(int i = 0; i < sizeof(numbers); i++) {
  Serial.println( numbers[i] );
}
```

This code would start at *i = 0* (index 0) and loop through *i = 4* (index 4). For each index, the code would print the element of the array at that index.

### Example Music
We are going to need to create an array for the frequencies as well as the durations of each note. We will then iterate through each array and play the tone for that length.

On an Arduino, the *CircuitPlayground* library has a function called *playTone*. For example,

```
CircuitPlayground.playTone(440, 1000);
```

would play the 440 Hz (A) frequency for 1000 milliseconds. In order to invoke the *playTone* function, we need to include the *CircuitPlayground* library and initialize the library in the *setup*. We have provided some sample code for playing the first part of The Alphabet Song described above in code:

```
//Import Statements
#include <Adafruit_CircuitPlayground.h>

//Part 1
int whole = 1000;
int half = .5 * whole;
int quarter = .5 * half;
int eighth = .5 * quarter;

//Part 2
void setup() {
  CircuitPlayground.begin();
}

//Part 3
void loop() {
  playMusic();
}

//Part 4
void playMusic() {
  double notes[] = {261.63, 261.63, 392, 392, 440, 440, 392, 349.23, 349.23, 329.63, 329.63, 293.66, 293.66, 293.66, 293.66, 261.63};
  int durations[] = {quarter, quarter, quarter, quarter, quarter, quarter, half, quarter, quarter, quarter, quarter, eighth, eighth, eighth, eighth, half};
  for(int i = 0; i < sizeof(notes); i++) {
    double note = notes[i];
    int duration = durations[i];
    CircuitPlayground.playTone(note, duration);
  }
}
```

Lets go through the code part by part.

In **Import Statements**, we include the *CircuitPlayground* library.

In **Part 1**, we declare an integer called *whole* and set it to 1000 millisecond. Because half notes are half of whole notes and quarter notes are half of half notes and so on, all we needed to do was declare a value for the whole note, and we set each subsequent duration value to *.5* times the value before it. This gives us two benefits:
- By changing the value of *whole*, we therefore change each smaller value.
- When we use these duration values in our code, we can just call the name of the variable to make the code easier to read.

In **Part 2**, we initialize the *CircuitPlayground* library.

In **Part 3**, we declare two arrays: one for the frequencies called *notes*, and one for the durations called *durations*. In the *notes* array, we listed the frequency of the note we needed in order using the frequency chart above. In duration, we listed the duration value of each note. We then use a *for loop* to loop from index 0 to the size of the array (it doesn't matter which array we use since both arrays have the same size). We get the value of the current note (*notes[i]*) and the value of the current duration (*duration[i]*). We then use the *playTone* function in the *CircuitPlayground* library to play the *tones[i]* tone for the *duration[i]* duration. The *for loop* will run through each note and duration sequentially to produce the melody.

### Your Turn
**Task** Start with the program you created in [Reset Functionality](../4-3/). Use the set of frequencies and duration values you wrote in [Music](../4-2/) to produce a function that plays music, as shown above. You will then call the music function in the *reset* function you wrote earlier. In this task, you will need to:
- In Part 1, declare and initialize *whole*, *half*, *quarter*, and *eighth* which will represent the durations of your notes.
- In Part 2, the *CircuitPlayground* should already be initialized for the NeoPixels so there is nothing to do here.
- In Part 4, create a function that will play your music.
  - Create an array of *double* values and put your frequencies in order in the array.
  - Create an array of *int* values and put your durations in order in the array.
  - Loop through one of the arrays (they are the same size), and call the *playTone* method using the *i*th tone and the *i*th duration.
- In Part 3, call your music function in the *reset* function.
