---
title: 4 Data Structures
permalink: /docs/4/
---
## Overview

| ---: | :--- |
| **Grade Level** | 6-8 |
| **Duration**  | 150 minutes  |
|   |   |

## Established Goal(s)/Target(s)
- Add reset functionality using conditionals and digital sensors.
- Use arrays to store and iterate through sound frequencies and delays to create music.

## Computer Science Standards
- *CS.AP.6-8.4* decompose problems and subproblems into parts to facilitate the design, implementation, and review of programs.
- *CS.CS.6-8.1* recommend improvements to the design of computing devices, based on an analysis of how users interact with the devices.

## Materials
The following materials are required for this lesson:
- 1 Computer with Arduino IDE downloaded
- Friend-O-Meter project (so far)
- __ alligator clips <span class="todo">Decide how many alligator clips</span>
- 1 USB to microUSB

## Vocabulary
The following are terms used in this lesson.

 Term | Definition
 ---: | --
**Frequency**  |  the number of sound waves that pass a fixed point in unit time.
**Music**  |  a combination of frequencies and time delays.
**Buzzer**  |  an audio signaling device which may be mechanical, electromechanical, or piezoelectric (piezo for short).
**Button**  |  a physical sensor that outputs a binary value.

## Activity Guide

### Reset Functionality
push buttons
digitalRead
Dummy vars
Use buttons to reset NeoPixels and start over
Make reset function

### Music
Buzzer
Frequency
Note length

### Arrays
Get/Set values
Iteration
Add music function after reset button pressed
